Cross Jr., head of the Department of Aerospace
Engineering. Today's date is July 24th. Dr.
Cross, would you discuss your boyhood years?
Born and raised in a small town in central
Pennsylvania called Mill Hall. Went to high
school three miles away in Lock Haven,
Pennsylvania. Graduated from high school in 1948
and went to Penn State. Where is Penn State? State
College. What's the name of the city? State
College is the name of the city. Stayed there two
years and entered the Air Force. Alright, before
you go on that, would you tell us about your
parents? Parents were both born and raised on
farms. My mother was a housewife. She had gone to
the local teacher's college and graduated from
that and was a certified teacher. My dad worked for
Slovenia Electric Company most of the time, quit
after I left high school and entered into his own
business. What about brothers and sisters? One
sister, younger. Where does she live today? She
lives in Reading, Pennsylvania.
When you went to Penn State, you studied aerospace
engineering? No, physics. Physics. You got your
bachelor's degree in physics. No, just two years
in physics. Would you discuss that?
In what sense? I stayed at Penn State only two
years. and studied physics. The Korean War was in
the middle of its biggest flap. I left and joined
the Air Force as an aviation cadet. Where were you
stationed during this time? I went to flight
school in Columbus, Mississippi and Enid,
Oklahoma. How long were you in the Air Force?
Twenty-two years. You stayed in straight
through? Stayed in straight through. Alright,
what about your bachelor's degree? I returned to
Penn State as an Air Force student in 57 after
having flown for four and a half years and finished
a bachelor's degree in aerospace, really
aeronautical engineering in 59.
What about your graduate work? Well, following
the bachelor's degree, I was assigned to the
10-foot Trans-Sonic Wind Tunnel at Wright Field.
Where? Wright Field, Wright-Patterson Air Force
Base in Dayton, Ohio.
I was there for about four years, and Ohio State had
a local
part of the university graduate school, which I
attended after duty hours. The Air Force sent me
off again in 62 to the University of Texas for
graduate school, and I finally finished both an
M.S. and a Ph.D. at the University of Texas. What
year did you finish the Ph.D.? 68. What was the
subject of your dissertation? It involved the
lee-side flow field of a sharp-edged delta wing,
really a series of delta wings, at hypersonic Mach
numbers. It was an experimental
study, primarily. Did a series of wind tunnel
tests a small tunnel we had at the Aerospace
Research Laboratories in Dayton and also a series
of studies in the I guess it was a four-foot
hypersonic tunnel in the Arnold Air Development
Center in Tallahoma, Tennessee.
Can you tell us about your family?
Married Judy Wanker, galley dated in high school
after flight school. Spell that last name.
W-E-N-K-E-R.
Do you have children? Six. Six children. Three
boys, three girls, ranging in age now from 27
through 17. All right. You left the Air Force in
1972. Three. What did you do then? I became the
director, well I went to Mississippi State
University as a professor of aerospace
engineering and director of the Raspid Flight
Research Laboratory. Did you spell the name of
that? R-A-S-P-E-T. How long did you stay there?
Six years. Did you stay there until 79 when you came
to A&M as head of the Department of Aerospace
Engineering? Yeah, I came here in July of 79.
What was the name of the department head before you
came here? There was an interim department head,
Stan Lowy, and prior to him Al Kronk who had been the
department head since I think the late 60s. Did you
spell those last names there? Yes, Stan Lowy is
L-O-W-Y and Al Kronk is C-R-O-N-K.
What are some of the duties that you undertake as
department head?
I'm responsible for the administration of the
academic program and the research program. The
academic program includes the budgets and
planning and
growth development of the faculty,
also the development of the graduate program.
responsible for the daily or the day-by-day
administrative duties,
which there are uncounted ones of. Or do you teach
any classes? I teach regularly typically one
class. In what? Aerodynamics.
Could you discuss the number of faculty members
that you supervise and where some of the schools
that these faculty members are from? Okay, right
now we have,
let's see, 17.
Ohio State, I guess, is the dominant school. We
have three from Ohio State, one from Rutgers, I'm
from the University of Texas. Well, there are two
others from the University of Texas. So we have
three from UT.
Two from Mississippi State. One from Illinois.
Let's see. One from MIT.
All right. What is the size of the aerospace
engineering program here compared to the other
engineering programs?
Relative to the other engineering programs at
A&M, we're right in the middle of the ten. About how
many students do you have enrolled? We have about
550 undergraduates expect in the fall. That's
fall of 81. We'll have over 600, which makes us
probably the largest aero department in the
country. The largest what? The largest aero
department in the country. Oh,
okay. About how many graduate students did you say
you said? No, we're deficient in the graduate
student area. We're having a dreadful time of
tracking them. We've got right now about 20. And
you have both of the graduate degrees offered
here? We offer MS, ME, DE, and PhD. Why is it
difficult to attract graduate students into
aerospace engineering? They're getting very
lucrative offers from industry with promise of
company subsidized graduate studies on site. And
that appears much more attractive than anything
we can offer.
That's a major limitation in our research program
too.
During the 1970s, as I understand it, there was a
major slump in aerospace engineering all over the
country. Could you discuss that? There was.
Actually, it started in the 60s and continued into
the middle 70s.
The major source of the thing came about as a wind
down of the Vietnamese war, I believe, since the
aerospace industry is very closely coupled with
DOD budget. But we've been slowly recovering to
the point now where I think we've exceeded, at
least in terms of undergraduate enrollment, the
level we had reached during the late 60s.
Historically, the aerospace industry has been
cyclical.
There's been some effort by government to
eliminate the peaks and the valleys. I'm not real
sure if that's going to happen. But aerospace
engineers are being used in more and more types of
industry now, not so tightly tied to the aerospace
industries. So engineers with aerospace
engineering degrees can get jobs in related
fields? They can get jobs in a whole range of fields
which are just starting to recognize some of the
things that aerospace engineers are
particularly good at and that's lightweight
structures,
control systems,
things that involve fluid flows, and more
recently the transportation industry has been
hiring aerospace engineers.
Okay, could you explain in layman's terms what an
aerospace engineer does on the job? Oh boy,
there's a whole range of things he does. Typically
the young engineer that is one right fresh out of
the university with a bachelor's degree We'll
wind up working for a senior engineer, and he'll
serve primarily as the interface between the
senior engineer and the computer terminal. And
slowly he'll be worked into involvement in more
significant kinds of problems.
We maintain that our engineers are trained
principally as designers. and expect that
they'll be involved in the design process.
They're also well suited for not
necessarily research, but the kinds of things
that are categorized as experimental
development
or exploratory development. and projects which
involve development of the technology relative
to the technology which is pertinent to the
product, either an aerospace system or whatever
the company happens to be producing, automobiles
maybe.
OK. Of about 550 students that you have, about how
many of them are women?
Last semester we had twelve percent. Twelve
percent. So sixty. Alright, about what percent
are black?
Less than one percent. Why is it difficult to
attract blacks to engineering programs? I don't
really know. If I did know, I would have more.
What about foreign students? We have very few
foreign students
in either the graduate program or the
undergraduate program. We have currently two
foreign students out of about 20 in the graduate
program, and I'm not real sure how many in the
undergraduate program. Well, some of the other
engineering programs attract a good many foreign
students, so why would it be that this aerospace
didn't attract as many as some of the others? Well,
the program does attract a lot. We don't admit
many. Okay. What about your admissions standard?
Can you talk about that in the graduate program?
The graduate program admissions are pretty much a
function of departmental
policy, our control mechanism really is tied to
fellowships,
research assistantships, teaching
assistantships, things of that sort. We have a lot
of applicants that are in fact qualified for entry
that never come because we don't offer an
assistantship to them.
What do you go by to decide who gets offered an
assistantship? It's pretty much on the basis of
quality, and the quality criteria is associated
with undergraduate GPR. We look for
undergraduate GPRs well in excess of three, and
also GRE scores. We like to see the GRE scores in
excess of 1,100.
What salary does a beginning aerospace engineer
with a bachelor's degree usually expect to
receive? This past spring they were receiving
typically $23,000.
What about someone with more experience and a
graduate degree, what would they expect? A
master's degree was typically being offered
$26,000, $27,000.
and a PhD, $33,000 nominally. Is there still a
problem with aerospace engineers having
difficulty finding positions the way it was
earlier? No. All of our graduates at all levels
have had multiple offers, and it's been a matter of
selecting the one that was most appealing to them.
I know at one time, particularly in the Seattle
area, there was a problem with aerospace
engineers who couldn't find jobs. do you know
anything about that up there how that situation's
been alleviated yeah the situation has been
alleviated I don't know if it's been cured the
Seattle aerospace industry is a one company
operation that's Boeing and when Boeing has
problems and the Seattle-based aerospace
engineers have problems right now Boeing is very
very healthy
How do you find the quality of your undergraduate
students? The quality of the entering freshmen is
typically not very good. And we've found that of an
entering freshman class, we'll probably only
graduate somewhere between 25% and 35%. So it's
very inefficient. And most of these, you think,
drop out or they go to other fields of engineering
or what? I think most of them leave engineering.
Typically they're poorly counseled and poorly
prepared by their high schools. So most leave
engineering. Some transfer to other engineering
disciplines. Could it be that they enter the
program without understanding what aerospace
engineering actually is? They enter the program
with a fuzzy understanding of what engineering
is. and some mistaken notion about what aerospace
is really all about. You find the quality of the
graduate students greater compared to the
undergraduates? The quality of the graduate
students
is not as high as I would like to see it, but it's
considerably better than the undergraduate.
We have better control over the graduate program
than we do the undergraduate.
What about
your research duties here? Can you discuss the
research program? Okay,
I'm head of the Aerospace Engineering Division of
TEAS. And I have essentially the same kinds of
responsibilities
in the research side as I do in the academic side.
That is, I'm responsible for preparing budgets
and plans and the daily routine of administrative
responsibilities, responsible for recruiting
competent research people, competent research
support people. I'm directly responsible for the
7 foot by 10 foot low speed wind tunnel, and also the
flight mechanics laboratory at the research
center.
And more recently, I guess, a 6 by 6 foot
environmental wind I'm responsible for the
overall maintenance of an adequate level of
activity in the research of aerodynamic or
aerospace-related topics.
Where do you do the research here? What part of the
campus is this done on? The wind tunnel is at
Easterwood Airport. The flight mechanics lab is
at the
research center. at the old Bryan Air Force Base.
The other major facility we utilize is the
mainframe computer at the data processing
center. So those that are involved in
experimental research are typically working off
campus. Those that are involved in theoretical
research are primarily working on the campus. Do
the faculty members divide their time equally
between teaching and research? It depends. We
target senior faculty for 50% research during the
academic year and 100% during the summers, which
amounts to a total research activity of about 67%.
The junior faculty, in a break, occurs someplace
in a guy's professional development as an
associate professor. The junior faculty, we
expect to be involved in 25% research during the
academic year and 100% during the summers, which
amounts to something like 48% overall
split. But involvement in research implies
outside support. We have only very limited
resources to subsidize research. The money we
have we spend typically in support of preliminary
research activity by junior faculty leading to
hopefully development of a proposal and support
from some outside agency. What are some of the
sources of your funding for the research program?
It comes from all over. I guess the major sources
are NASA at several research centers, DOD, the
National Science Foundation,
a whole range of companies that contract with us
for various kinds of research, architectural
companies, aircraft companies, some energy
companies or oil companies.
What about state legislative funding? Does that
finance some of the research? Yeah.
It supports the research to the extent that we can
pay those
kinds of people that support the researchers. As
an example,
we have an A&P mechanic at the flight level. We pay
his salary out of state money. 25% of my salary is
paid out of state money. We pay our secretary out of
state money. And we'll also support young faculty
in the development of their research program. you
consider the state legislative funding adequate
or is more needed i think it's adequate you can
always use more what has happened in this
department is that there's been an inadequate
investment historically say going back 15 years
there's been a woefully inadequate investment in
capital equipment The capital equipment that was
here 15 years ago has been depleted because of
inadequate investment in maintenance and
update, so that now our capability,
particularly in the experimental area, is
seriously limited by inadequate equipment. What
was the reason the equipment was not properly
invested into? I think primarily due to
inattention. Sir? Inattention. Nobody was
paying attention to what was going on and what was
required.
That combined with the fact that during that
period, I guess the majority of the research
involved theoretical things. It isn't peculiar
to Texas A&M. I think it's been typically the case
where many universities, particularly state
universities, state-endowed universities,
have depleted their capital resources over the
last 15 or 20 years to the point now where
laboratory equipment, particularly research
equipment and facilities, have been virtually
totally depleted And we're faced now with a
monster problem of replacing those things at
prices that are orders of magnitude higher than
they had been.
That's going to be a long time and difficult
period to correct these things.
Okay. Tell us something more specifically about
particular research projects that are now
underway.
Okay. Let's see, starting with the theoretical
activity. I guess Lee Carlson is the shiny one
exactly right now. He's been involved for many
years and is still active in the research of
transonic airfoil development.
That's been extended or expanded now to include
three-dimensional aspects of that problem. He's
been funded by NASA Langley for six, eight years in
that area. He's also involved in a
massive separation problem for
three-dimensional wings that are approaching
stalled conditions. He's also been involved in
a balloon, a large scientific balloon analyses
which involved a float condition for these
things, funded out of Wallops Research Center,
which is a piece of NASA.
Dave Norton is an experimentalist, so I guess I
shouldn't jump onto him right away. Walt Hasler,
another very strong theoretical... Spell that
last name. Hasler, H-A-I-S-L-E-R,
has been involved for many years in applications
of finite element methods to the constitutive
modeling of materials and analyses of various
kinds of structures.
Let's see, what else do we have? David Allen has
recently come on board. He will become active also
in that research area. Dave Norton has been very
active in the area of environmental
aerodynamics, which is primarily an
experimental a continuing experimental study of
the wind effects on architectural structures,
new buildings, offshore oil rigs,
things of that sort.
Stan Miley has been active. Say that last night,
please. Stan Miley, M-I-L-E-Y, an associate
professor, been here two years, has been active in
a theoretical study of the influence of a
propeller slipstream on forces generated by
wings, nacelles, and aircraft fuselages.
primarily interested in the interaction of those
three aircraft components in the propeller
slipstream.
He's also been active in the study of low Reynolds
number airfoils in application to windmills and
power generation.
Howard Chevalier has been active in wind tunnel
studies and flight test studies of stall
prevention systems, or the general problem of
stall prevention in general aviation aircraft.
He's also been recently involved in wind tunnel
studies of various aircraft configurations. in
particular forward sweep of wings and canard
surfaces.
That's all I can think of right now. So you entered
the University of Teaching in 1973 at Mississippi
State. Yeah. Have you seen any change in just those
eight years that you've been involved in What
changes have you seen in the aerospace program,
even though taking into account that there are two
institutions involved here that you've been in?
Yeah, the really big change has involved the
increased application of computer methods to
all phases of the thing, and in particular the use
of computers in design. We're just now making a
sizable investment in computers for use in
systems design, particularly aircraft design.
We have a series of three courses in design of
structures, propulsion, and aircraft. And we'll
be using the computer more and more in connection
with the sizable investments required. That's
one of the areas in which there's been an
inadequate university investment. Not peculiar
to A&M, but most universities have fallen into
that trap. Have you seen any change in the quality
of the students during those eight years? Yeah,
there has been, I think,
kind of an anomaly occur in that we're getting more
and more of the really super good students, but
we're also getting more and more of the not so super
good students. So the tail ends of the
distribution of student quality is moving out in
both directions. But we are getting more and more
of the really good students. That's the same
observation that Dr. Jones in electrical
engineering had found, what you just said.
I interviewed him. He found the same situation.
The so-called poor students, what are their
deficiencies in? Mathematics and the physical
sciences and motivation.
You mentioned this. new investment needed in the
computer. Are there any new facilities being
planned for aerospace engineering here?
Not specifically for aerospace engineering, but
there is a committee, or maybe several
committees, that's looking very carefully at the
computer problem in particular. And whatever
they do will have a major impact on aerospace
engineering. I don't really know precisely where
the whole thing is headed, but whatever they do is
going to have a major impact in our program. Is
aerospace engineering going to be in this
building you're in now indefinitely?
Yes, we've been here since I guess 54 or so when the
building was new. There's a minor renovation
occurring in the building now, and we'll relocate
to the second floor in the fall, but we'll be in this
building for the next 180 years or so. What other
departments are in this building? The business
college just moved out in June, leaving
engineering design graphics on the third floor,
sharing the middle floor with us, and there's a
small piece of parks and recreation in the other
end of the middle floor.
What do you think are some of the challenges that
aerospace engineers can look for in the 1980s?
Oh, boy. I guess the major challenge involves the
impact of the energy situation on transportation
in general, but in particular aircraft.
It also impacts such things as the automotive
industry. And there have been more and more space
engineers involved in working that problem. That
seems to me to be the major challenge, the
development of transportation systems which are
energy efficient.
Prior to 1975 or whenever it was that that the OPEC
countries first lowered the boom on us, the major
emphasis was on performance rather than energy
efficiency. Now that has swung completely around
the other way to the point where energy efficiency
is the primary concern,
with maybe the possible exception of
defense-related systems.
What is the best that you personally expect
for an energy efficient engine to get, say for an
automobile? The best performance? That's really
difficult to put a number on because it's a
combination of the engine with the device,
whatever it is, an automobile or a truck or a bus.
Now
in regard to say commuter type automobiles
they're talking in terms of 75 miles per gallon
within the next several years. You think that's
realistic? Yeah, yeah I believe it is. You might
not like the vehicle but I believe you can get 75
miles per gallon.
But you mentioned earlier that Texas A&M had one of
the largest aerospace engineering programs in
the country. Would you elaborate on that? I think
it is the largest undergraduate aerospace
program in the country. And this program was
established in 1940. Is that about the time that
most of the others were established across the
country, or is that a little later or earlier? I
think that's just about the same time most of them
are popping up, 1938, 39, 40, and on
through the 40s. Then during the 60s, a lot of aero
departments were combined with other
departments because of low enrollment and things
of that sort. So you'll find a lot of aerospace and
mechanical engineering departments around the
country.
What would be the next largest aerospace programs
after Texas A&M? Penn State has the next, as far as I
know, undergraduate program. Our graduate
program is not anywhere near the largest, and I'm
not really sure who has the largest aerospace
graduate program.
Purdue also has a large, large department. Why do
you think aerospace engineering doesn't attract
as many students as some of the other engineering
fields? There isn't as big a market for aerospace
engineers as say mechanical or electrical
and the enrollment kind of seeks its own level
based on the marketability of the particular
degree. Typically, we attract students that are
enthused by airplanes and or the space program,
things of that sort. Since the shuttle success, I
expect to see an increase in our enrollment. Was
Texas A&M involved in space shuttle research?
Yeah, since about The date is uncertain, but we
have been involved in the development of the
configuration through wind tunnel tests, also
involved in an evaluation of the damage tolerance
of the tile system,
and maybe some other lesser things. We're now
involved in the development of a system to de-ice
the main tank. of the launch vehicle. The fuel was
liquid hydrogen. And whilst it's sitting on the
pad, it accumulates a significant amount of ice.
And during the launch sequence, that ice breaks
loose and damages the tile. So NASA's interested
in de-icing the tank whilst it's on the pad. And
then you expect the space shuttle promote more
research in this field in aerospace engineering.
Oh, sure. Yeah, it'll be a continuing thing. Is
there anything else that you'd like to say before
we close? Don't think so. I believe that's about
all I know to ask you. I appreciate you taking the
time to talk with me. Okay. Thank you.